<p> These projects were initiated by public organization „Atviras
Kodas Lietuvai“ („Open Source for Lithuania“), by the members of
„Atviras Kodas Lietuvai“ and other free and open source activists in Lithuania.

<h2>Lithuanian Language in Information Technologies
(LIKIT -- Lietuvių Kalba Informacinėse Technologijose)</h2>

<p>2001

<p>The aim of LIKIT project is to analyze the problems of Lithuanian
language in computer science and to provide useful information and
consultation on using Lithuanian language and standards in information
technologies.

<p>The first activities concerning open source software in Lithuania were
launched at the end of 2001 by the <a
href="http://www.ivpk.lt">Information Society Development
Committee</a> to the Government of Lithuania. State Enterprise <a
href="http://www.is.lt">„Infostruktūra“</a> made analyze of
possibilities to localize open source programs, and a pilot
translation of Internet program „Mozilla“ was made. The results of
investigation are published and being renewed at <a
href="http://www.likit.lt">www.likit.lt</a>.

<p>Project team: a professional team of specialists of <a
href="http://www.aldona.mii.lt/pms/">Mathematics and Informatics
Institute</a>, <a href="http://www.vu.lt">Vilnius University
Mathematics Faculty</a>.




<h2>The Study of Use of Open Source Software (OSS) in EU</h2>

<p>The project was held on September till November, 2002

<p>The aim of this project was to justify and forecast use of open
source software in public and governmental sectors, prepare
recommendations on using OSS in Lithuania. The objective was to
analyze experience of use and legislation of open source software in
European Union countries.

<p>The brief analyze contains information about choosing, installing
and using open source software at governmental level in Europe. Also,
it holds a review of EU laws for using open source software and open
standards for data exchange. In this report there are mentioned all
possible means to promote and encourage, also recommendations, to use
open source programs in Lithuania.

<p>The result of the project is a 200 page report published at <a
href="http://www.ivpk.lt">www.ivpk.lt</a>

<p>Project was accomplished by Tomas Jonušas private company „Viae
Ventus“ in the fall 2002.

<p>Project was sponsored by Information Society Development Committee
at the Government of the Republic of Lithuania.

<p>Total cost of the project was 6.000EUR. 




<h2>Pilot implementation and trial use of open source software at
Governmental Institutions</h2>

<p>The project was held on September till November, 2002. 

<p>The aim of this project was to test in practice and to prove that
it is possible to use open source programs at Governmental
institutions as an alternative to commercial software, and that using
open source programs functionality and productivity of workers remains
at the same level.

<p>The project was of two parts: localization of open source software
and pilot implementation at work places.

<h4>LOCALIZATION</h4>

<p>The aim was to localize ant translate into national language
programs for office work automation, mail client and browser. The
software was chosen: package of office programs <a
href="http://www.openoffice.org">„OpenOffice.org“</a> and Internet and
mail programs <a href="http://www.mozilla.org">„Mozilla“</a>. These
programs were localized and partially translated.

<h4>IMPLEMENTATION</h4>

<p>During the project period three main products were tested: <a
href="http://www.openoffice.org">„OpenOffice.org“</a>, <a
href="http://www.mozilla.org">„Mozilla“</a> and „Linux“ operating
system. Open source software was installed in more than twenty desktop
working places at the Ministry of Environment, Center of Information
Technologies of Education and Information Technologies and
Communication Department to the Ministry of the Interior.

<p>Depending on the results of pilot implementation, there were
prepared instructions for open source software users (in Lithuanian
language).

<p>The results of the project surpassed all expectations: there were
no problems that could not be solved during the project and there were
no essential problems that could not let using open source programs at
Governmental institutions.  Results of the project were publicly
announced at press conference held at Information Society Development
Committee at Government of the Republic of Lithuania on the 6th of
December, 2002.

<p>Reports (only in Lithuanian language) of the project process and
results, also localized (translated) open source software and
documentation are published at <a
href="http://www.ivpk.lt/main.php?id=opensource/index.html">www.ipvk.lt</a>.

<p>The project team: specialists of State Enterprise <a
href="http://www.is.lt">„Infostruktūra“</a>, <a
href="http://www.aldona.mii.lt/pms/">Mathematics and Informatics
Institute</a>, <a href="http://www.vu.lt">Vilnius University</a> and
public organization <a href="http://www.akl.lt">„Open Source for
Lithuania“</a>.

<p>Project was sponsored by Information Society Development Committee
to the Government of the Republic of Lithuania.

<p>Total cost of the project was 55.000 EUR. 


<h2>„Free Software CD“</h2>

<p>International IT exhibition „Infobalt 2002“ in Vilnius, October 23-26, 2002

<p>The aim was to present computer users free and open source programs.

<p><a href="http://files.akl.lt/AKL/InfoBalt-2002/">„Free Software
CD“</a> is a set of free and open source software for „Windows“
operating system. Apart the main office, Internet and mail
programs, the CD contains other usefull programs and tools. Some of
the programs are translated into Lithuanian.

<p>All the collected programs are distributed under the terms of free licences (GPL -
General Public Licence, LGPL - Library GPL, MIT and others). These
licences let the user copy and modify the programs and use them in
multiple computers in any field of activities (also in commerce). But,
according to the licences, one who wants to sell the programs, has to
provide free access to the origin and modified source code.

<p>2000 copies of the CD were printed and distributed for free.  With
„Free Software CD“ project AKL had its booth in scientific and
non-profit organization area at the „Infobalt 2002“ exhibition. With
the CD project AKL won „The Initiative of the Year“ award.

<p>Results. We have distributed over 2.000 copies of CD and collected
feedbacks from the users about their knowledge of open source software
and „Linux“. We have experienced that there is lack of information
about alternative software to commercial, so we have created mailing
list for newsletters to raise awareness of IT.

<p>The main content of CD was collected by AKL member Mantas
Kriaučiūnas. The main sponsorhip job was done by AKL member Tomas
Jonušas. Others, also very enthusiastic were AKL members: Albertas
Agejevas (AKL president), Jaroslav Šatkevič and Vilius Ališauskas. And
a group of open source activists that helped us in various forms.

<p>The project was sponsored by: 

<a href="http://www.ivpk.lt">Information Society Development
Committee</a>,

<a href="http://www.infobalt.lt">„Infobalt“ Association</a>,

<a href="http://www.ups.lt">UAB „Skubios Siuntos“ (UPS)</a>,

<a href="http://www.ibm.lt">UAB „IBM Lietuva“</a>, 

<a href="http://www.codeworks.lt">UAB „Codeworks“</a>, 

Personal Enterprise <a href="http://www.svedas.net/">“Sisteminio
administravimo technologijos“ (SAT)</a>,

<a href="http://www.infobalt.lt/agentura/">„Infobalt“ Copyright
Agency</a>, 

State Enterprise <a href="http://www.is.lt">„Infostruktūra“</a>,

Personal Enterprise „Viae Ventus“.
</p>

<p>Total cost of the project: 4.000EUR


<h2>Database of Open Source Software</h2>

<p>December, 2002

<p>The aim of this system is to provide Lithuanian computer users with
information about free and open source programs.

<p>On December of 2002 at the commission of the Information Society
Development Committee to the Government of Lithuania <a
href="http://www1.ivpk.lt/oss">the portal</a> of free and open source
software was launched. The database is improving and filling in with
new information.

<p>The system was created and is supported by the <a
href="http://www.mediaworks.lt/">„Media Works“</a> enterprise.


<h2>„Linux“ distribution „Knoppix“</h2>

<p>IT exhibition „Info 2003“ in Kaunas on April 24-26, 2003.

<p>The aim of this project was to present an open source operating
system.

<p>AKL has presented a localized and partially translated „Linux“
operating system „Knoppix“ at IT exhibition „Info 2003“ in Kaunas.

<p>„Knoppix“ is a bootable CD with a collection of GNU/Linux software,
automatic hardware detection, and support for many graphics cards,
sound cards, SCSI and USB devices and other peripherals. „Knoppix“ can
be used as a Linux demo, educational CD, rescue system, or adapted and
used as a platform for commercial software product demos. It is not
necessary to install anything on a hard disk. Due to on-the-fly
decompression, the CD can have up to 2 GB of executable software
installed on it.

<p>These are the reasons why we have chosen „Knoppix“ for open source
software presentation. For all willing to have free software installed
in their computers we burned „live CD“ at place in their CD's.
Rezultatai

<p>Project manager was AKL member Mantas Kriaučiūnas. He is the main
initiator of localizing and translating, also reporting and fixing
bugs of „Knoppix“.

<p>We were sponsored in computers and a stand at exhibition.

<p>Mantas Kriaučiūnas, mantas at akl.lt



<h2>Localization and translation of open source software</h2>

<p>There are a lot of open source programs that are localized and
translated in to Lithuanian language by initiative members of
Lithuanian open source community.

<p>For the moment main desktop environment programs KDE ang GNOME are
localized and translated. Several projects were sponsored by
Information Society Development Committee.

<p>Most of the localized and translated software are publish on the
website <a href="http://www.lietuvybe.org">www.lietuvybe.org</a> .

<p><a href="http://www.lietuvybe.org/vertimai/linux.php">Here</a> you can
find more info about software localization and translation initiators and software.


<h2>Open source software presentations for key policy-makers</h2>

<p>February, March, 2002

<p>At the initiative of AKL in spring of 2002 there are organized open
source software presentations for key policy-makers and main IT policy
visionaries at the national level in Seimas and Government:

<ul>

  <li>presentation „Use of Open Source Software at Governmental Level“
  to the Government of Lithuania and Information Society Development
  Committee, 15th of February, 2002

  <li>presentation „Benefits of Using Open Source Software in Public
  Sector“ to Information Society Development Committee at Seimas of
  the Republic of Lithuania, 17th of March, 2002

  <li>presentation with a guest E. S. Raymond, founder and president
  of Open Source Initiative, also famous of his book „The Cathedral
  and the Bazaar“. He spoke at the Seimas for the key persons of
  Lithuania, on the 4th of March, 2002. More than 200 attendees were
  at the seminar, including members of the Seimas, politicians, state
  authority representatives.

</ul>

<p>The result of these presentations was increased awareness of key
policy-makers on benefits of using open source software and open
standards at all levels of Governmental institutions.


<p> Project was organized and conducted by AKL members Tomas Jonušas,
Mantas Kriaučiūnas, Albertas Agejevas and Eugenijus Paulauskas on
private initiative and at no external costs.

<p>The visit of Mr. Eric Raymond was sponsored by „Codeworks“.
<a href="http://www.ibm.lt">UAB „IBM Lietuva“</a> sponsored
seminars with two IBM „ThinkPad“ notebooks.


<h2>Presentations for local authorities</h2>

<p>September, October, 2002

<p>Seminar for Šiauliai county local authorities on use of open source
software and open data standards in public sector. Seminar was held in
Šiauliai, on the 11th of September, 2002 by AKL members Tomas Jonušas
and Mantas Kriaučiūnas at their initiative.

<p>Seminar on „Perspectives of use of open source software in the
sector of public authority“ Seminar was held in Druskinininkai at the
conference of Information society development in Lithuanian
municipalities on the 14th of October, 2002. More than 60 attendees
from all Lithuanian municipalities were at the seminar. Seminar was
given by AKL member Tomas Jonušas at his initiative .



<h2>Presentation for school IT teachers</h2>

<p>November, 2002

<p>Presentation „Perspectives on using localized open source software
in the secondary schools of Lithuania“ was held at annual conference
of IT teachers of Lithuania. Conference took place in Klaipėda on the
9th of November, 2002. There were about 300 attendees at the
conference. Seminar was given by AKL member Tomas Jonušas at his
initiative.

